Nigel Warburton, Thinking from A to Z

absurd consequences move
Proving that a position is false, or at least untenable, by showing that if
true it would lead to absurd consequences. This is sometimes called a
reductio ad absurdum. It is a common and highly effective method of
refuting (see refutation) a position.

For example, if someone asserts (see assertion) that anyone
who takes a mind-altering drug is a danger to society and should be
locked away, then it is easy to refute them by using an absurd
consequences move. Alcohol is a mind-altering drug that many of
the greatest contributors to western civilisation have used on occa-
sion. Are we then to lock away everyone who has ever used alcohol?
Clearly that would be absurd. So, we can be confident that the genera-
lisation which led to the conclusion that we should do so is untenable.
It at least has to be refined so that it is clear precisely which mind-
altering drugs are supposed to be covered by the term (but see ad hoc
clauses).

Consider another example. A politician might argue that a good
way of increasing the income to the treasury would be to investigate
every taxpayer’s tax returns thoroughly, thereby clamping down on tax
evasion. However, in practice this would cost far more to carry out than
could possibly be reclaimed and so can be seen to lead to the absurd
consequence that a scheme for increasing income would end up by
reducing it. This gives us good grounds for jettisoning the politician’s
suggestion as matters now stand (assuming, of course, that the sole
reason for implementing such a policy was to increase treasury
income). If a cheaper way of investigating tax returns could be
developed then the politician’s suggestion might not lead to absurd
consequences and could be a viable policy.

One problem with using the absurd consequences move is that
there is usually no touchstone for absurdity; one person’s absurdity is
another’s common sense. Unless a view implies a contradiction there
is no easy way of demonstrating its absurdity (see biting the bullet).
Nevertheless, if you can see that obviously absurd consequences follow
from a position, it gives you good grounds for rejecting it.

adage
See truth by adage.

ad hoc clauses
Clauses added to a hypothesis to make the hypothesis consistent
with some new observation or discovered fact. If your hypothesis is
threatened by some inconvenient fact which it is incapable of explaining,
you have two options: you can either abandon your hypothesis and seek
a new one which is capable of explaining this new fact; or else you can
add a special clause to your general hypothesis, an ad hoc clause.
Patching up a hypothesis is a move which can be acceptable, but often is
not. This is most clearly seen by considering examples.

A politician might claim that if the rich are encouraged to grow
richer then the poorest of the nation will benefit because the wealth that
the rich generate will gradually trickle down to the poor. For the sake
of argument, suppose (see supposition) that a five-year study showed
that no such trickle-down effect occurred. The politician might then be
expected to abandon the initial hypothesis. However, another option
would be to add a special clause to the hypothesis to prevent the
evidence presented by the study standing as a refutation of it. For
instance, the new hypothesis could be, ‘If the rich are encouraged to
grow richer then the poorest of the nation will benefit because the
wealth that the rich generate will gradually trickle down to the poor, but
the effects of this will not be visible in the first five years.’ If the country
in question was just coming out of a recession, a different ad hoc clause
could be appended: ‘but the effects of encouraging the rich to become
richer will be masked by the effects of a recession.’

A biologist might begin with the hypothesis that all independent
living organisms are either unicellular (consist of a single cell) or multi-
cellular (have many cells). However, the existence of a bizarre animal,
known as slime mould, confounds this hypothesis, revealing it as a false
dichotomy since at one stage slime mould is an independent unicellular
organism and at another stage of its development it combines with
other unicellular slime moulds to form a multicellular organism. The
existence of slime mould confounds the hypothesis. In the light of this,
the biologist might modify the initial hypothesis to, ‘All independent
living organisms except slime mould are either unicellular or multi-
cellular.’ This would be an acceptable modification; however, if there
were a large number of species which, like slime mould, defied the
simple dichotomy in the hypothesis then adding further ad hoc clauses
would at a certain point undermine the power of the generalisation.

There is a fine line between making a hypothesis more detailed
in the light of further evidence and undermining its power as a
generalisation by adding numerous exception clauses.

ad hominem move
A Latin phrase meaning ‘to the person’. It is used in two main ways,
which can lead to confusion (see ambiguity). By far the most common
use is to draw attention to the devious move in debate which I discuss
in the section getting personal, that is, shifting attention from the point
in question to some non-relevant aspect of the person making it. Calling
someone’s statement ad hominem in this sense is always a reproach; it
involves the claim that the aspects of the arguer’s personality or
behaviour which have become the focus of discussion are irrelevant to
the point being discussed.

For example, someone might argue that we shouldn’t take
seriously the findings of a medical scientist who had researched
the beneficial effects of jogging on the cardiovascular system on the
grounds that the scientist was overweight and probably couldn’t run
more than a hundred yards. However, this fact is entirely irrelevant (see
irrelevance) to the scientist’s ability to assess the evidence. If the
scientist had been shown to be a liar, or an incompetent researcher, then
that would be relevant to our understanding of the results of the
research. But to focus on the scientist’s level of fitness is an example
of an ad hominem move in the first sense. This should not be confused
with the charge of hypocrisy, not practising what you preach. The
sedentary scientist would only be a hypocrite if he or she urged others
to take up jogging.

An ad hominem argument in the second sense is a legitimate
demonstration of an opponent’s inconsistency. This is a much rarer use
of the term. An argument is ad hominem in this second sense if it
involves turning the argument back on the opponent (sometimes known
as the ‘you too’ or ‘tu quoque’ move). For instance, if someone argues
both that all killing is morally wrong and that there is nothing immoral
about capital punishment, then (provided that you can demonstrate that
capital punishment is a form of killing — not a difficult task), you can
use an ad hominem argument (in the second sense) in response. It is
impossible without contradicting yourself (see contradiction) to claim
that all forms of killing are morally wrong and that one form of killing
is not morally wrong. That is tantamount to saying both that all killing
is morally wrong and that it is not true that all killing is morally wrong.
In this case turning the argument back on the opponent would clearly
demonstrate that his or her position was untenable.

It is important to distinguish the two senses of ad hominem
because the first is an informal fallacy; the second a perfectly accept-
able move in argument.

affirming the antecedent
A valid argument (see validity) with the following form:
  If p then q
  p
  Therefore q

Here p and q are used to stand for any states of affairs that you care
to insert: the antecedent is p and the consequent q. This form of
argument is often known by its Latin name, modus ponens, which
means ‘the mood that affirms’. An example of affirming the antecedent
is
  If you have bought this book I will receive a royalty.
  You have bought this book.
  Therefore I will receive a royalty.

Another example of affirming the antecedent is
  If you are a goldfish then you can ride a bicycle
  You are a goldfish
  Therefore you can ride a bicycle

Note that in this second example the obvious absurdity of the first
premise doesn’t affect the validity of the argument: both arguments
have the same logical form.

Affirming the antecedent should be clearly distinguished from
the formal fallacy known as affirming the consequent.

affirming the consequent
A formal fallacy which may have the superficial appearance of a valid
argument (see validity). It has the following underlying form:
  If p then q
  q
  therefore p

For instance, both of the following have the same underlying structure
as I have given in terms of p and q above:

  If you possess a Green Card you can work legally in the United
  States.
  You can work legally in the United States.
  So you’ve got a Green Card.

and
  If a car runs out of fuel it stops.
  Your car has stopped.
  So your car has run out of fuel.

It is probably easier to see what is wrong with this form of argument
by considering some more examples of the same form:
  If she secretly loved me and didn’t want her boyfriend to find
  out then she wouldn’t reply to my letters.
  She hasn’t replied to my letters.
  So she secretly loves me and doesn’t want her boyfriend to find
  out.

What is wrong with this argument is that even if the two premises are
true, then the conclusion isn’t necessarily true: it might be true and it
might not. So it’s not a reliable deduction. Its conclusion is a non
sequitur: it doesn’t necessarily follow. It treats the fact of her not
replying to my letters as a sufficient condition (see necessary and
sufficient conditions) of her secretly loving me and not wanting her
boyfriend to find out. But it is obvious that the first premise does not
maintain that the only possible reason for her lack of response is that
she secretly loves me; for the argument to be valid we would have to
read ‘if’ as meaning ‘if and only if’ (sometimes written by logicians as
‘iff’), and in most contexts it would be a sign of delusion or at least
wishful thinking to believe that the first premise offers the only
possible explanation of her lack of response. There are numerous
alternative explanations for her silence: she might be irritated by my
letters, she might not want to encourage me, she might never have
opened them. There is nothing inconsistent (see consistency) about
believing both that if she secretly loves me and doesn’t want her
boyfriend to find out then she won’t reply to my letters and that the fact
that she hasn’t replied to my letters is not necessarily an indication that
she secretly loves me.

Another example. People who have AIDS are prone to colds
and often suffer from night sweats. But it would be a mistake to
think that just because you are prone to colds and suffer from
night sweats that you must have AIDS. That is only one possible
explanation; it in no way follows logically from the premise ‘If you
have AIDS then you will be prone to colds and may suffer from night
sweats’ that anyone who has these symptoms must have AIDS. To
arrive at that conclusion you would need to believe that only people
who have AIDS are prone to colds and nights sweats; and that is
obviously untrue.

A more exaggerated example makes it clear that this form of
argument is not a reliable one. It is undoubtedly true that if I had bought
a new car then I would be massively overdrawn at the bank. As it
happens, I am massively overdrawn; but there are numerous alternative
explanations for this phenomenon, such as that my publisher isn’t
paying me high enough royalties to support my extravagant lifestyle. I
couldn’t reliably conclude from the fact that I am overdrawn that I must
have bought a car. That would clearly be absurd. This technique of
considering an obviously absurd argument of the same form in order to
show the invalidity of a type of argument is a useful one; it helps
separate the possible distraction of the particular content of an
argument from the underlying structure. If the argument is an invalid
one, even if it happens to yield a true conclusion, then we should not
rely on it since the conclusion is not one that follows logically from the
premises (see bad reasons fallacy).

One reason why fallacy of affirming the consequent can be
tempting is that it superficially resembles a valid form of argument
known as affirming the antecedent (modus ponens):
  If p then q
  p
  therefore q

An argument with this form is:
  If you burp your baby after feeding she’ll sleep soundly.
  You have burped your baby after feeding.
  So she’ll sleep soundly.

Here if the premises are true, the conclusion must be true. The
fallacious form of this argument would be:
  If you burp your baby after feeding she’ll sleep soundly.
  Your baby is sleeping soundly.
  So you must have burped her.

But, as the earlier examples demonstrated, affirming the consequent
in no way guarantees a true conclusion even if the premises are
true.

Even though many instances of this fallacy are simple to spot,
when some of the premises are implicit rather than stated the reasoning
errors can be harder to identify.

all and some
See some/all confusion.

alternative explanations
Ignored explanations of the phenomenon in question. In many
situations it is tempting to believe that because an explanation is
consistent (see consistency) with the known facts it must therefore be
the correct explanation. This is especially tempting when the particular
explanation is the one which we would most like to be true. However,
this is wishful thinking and ignores the possibility of plausible
alternative explanations of precisely the same observations.

The formal fallacy of affirming the consequent typically
involves ignoring alternative explanations, as for instance in the
following example:
  If you accidentally expose your film, then your photographs
  won’t come out.
  Your photographs haven’t come out.
  So you must have accidentally exposed your film.

Here the numerous alternative explanations for the photographs’ not
coming out have been completely ignored: you could have had faulty
film, they could have been inexpertly developed, or perhaps you forgot
to remove the lens cap.

When people are arguing from the existence of a correlation to a
conclusion about a causal connection (see correlation = cause
confusion) they are particularly prone to neglect the possibility of
alternative explanations. For instance, a scientist attempting to show
that musical ability is largely inherited might examine the musical
ability of a large number of children of talented musicians and compare
this with the ability of children from non-musical families. It would not
be surprising in such a survey to discover a significant correlation
between being a proficient musician and one or both of your parents
being musical themselves. However, if the scientist were to take this as
firm evidence of inherited musical ability this would be an unreliable
conclusion to draw from this evidence alone, since children of
musicians are far more likely to be taught to play a musical instrument
from an early age than are other children. In other words, the scientist
would be ignoring an alternative explanation of the same phenomenon.
In fact, probably the most plausible explanation is that there are both
hereditary and environmental factors in musical ability; this too is
consistent with the observed facts in the imaginary case above.

People who believe that aliens from another galaxy regularly
visit the earth, occasionally abduct people in order to perform medical
experiments on them, buzz unsuspecting airline pilots and so on,
usually maintain their exotic beliefs by ignoring the alternative
explanations of the phenomena they take to be evidence for their
beliefs. So, for instance, although it is undoubtedly true that strange
patterns are sometimes found in cornfields, it doesn’t follow that they
must have been made by extraterrestrials. There is a wide range of far
more plausible alternative explanations of the phenomenon, such as
that they have been made by pranksters, or are the result of freak
weather conditions. It is a huge and unwarranted step to move from the
fact that such crop circles could have been caused by extraterrestials to
the conclusion that they must have been. Before reaching that con-
clusion you would have to prove that visits by extraterrestials are the
only possible explanation, or at least the most plausible one, for crop
circles. Only when we have eliminated other possible explanations
should we believe the improbable. And even then we should be aware
of the power of wishful thinking.

ambiguity
An ambiguous word or phrase has two or more meanings. Ambiguity
should not be confused with vagueness. Vagueness results from
imprecision in language; ambiguity only arises when a word or phrase
can be interpreted in different ways. There are three common sorts of
ambiguity: lexical, referential and syntactical.

Lexical ambiguity occurs when a word with two or more possible
meanings is used so that the phrase or sentence in which it appears can
be understood in more than one way. For instance, a book called The
Myth of the Goddess could either be about a particular myth or else be
an attack on the idea that there ever was a goddess; this is because the
word ‘myth’ has two related yet distinct meanings. Or, similarly, from
the title Discrimination alone it would be impossible to tell whether a
book was about the unfair treatment of certain groups in society, as in
the phrase ‘racial discrimination’, or the ability to make subtle aesthetic
judgements, as in ‘the connoisseur exercised fine discrimination’. Of
course both these book titles could be deliberate puns. Puns play on
lexical ambiguities. When Dr Johnson saw two women standing on
their doorsteps arguing he commented that they would never agree
because they were ‘arguing from different premises’, a witticism
playing on two possible meanings of ‘premises’. Actually, however,
two people arguing from different premises (in the sense of starting-
points in arguments) could reach the same conclusion; but they
wouldn’t arrive at this conclusion by the same route.

Referential ambiguity occurs when a word is used so that it could
be taken to be referring to either of two or more things. For instance, if
two people in the room are called John, then just saying ‘There’s a
phone call for John’ will be decidedly unhelpful unless it’s clear from
the context which John you mean (you might, for example, look
straight at the appropriate John as you say it). Such ambiguities
of reference often occur when using pronouns such as ‘it’, ‘her’, ‘him’
and ‘they’. ‘The sultana rolled off my plate and came to rest underneath
my fork, so I picked it up’ doesn’t make absolutely clear what it was
that I picked up. Was it the sultana, the fork, or possibly, though less
likely, the plate? (Although strictly speaking the word ‘sultana’ could
mean ‘female sultan’, the context within the sentence rules out any
lexical ambiguity.)

Syntactical ambiguity, sometimes called amphiboly, occurs
when the order of words allows two or more interpretations. For
instance, ‘a small fish packing factory’ could mean either a factory for
packing small fish, or else a small factory for packing fish of an
undisclosed size. Here judicious use of hyphens would remove the
ambiguity; in other cases paraphrasing may be necessary. ‘I heard
about what you got up to at work yesterday’ is ambiguous in two ways.
It could either mean that I heard what you got up to when you were at
work, or that I was at work when I heard what you got up to. The
second way in which it is ambiguous is that the order of words leaves
it unclear as to whether it was yesterday that I heard about you, or
whether what I heard about you referred to something that you did
yesterday.

While it is extremely difficult to eliminate all ambiguity,
wherever there is a serious possibility of confusion it is worth taking the
time to make your intended meaning clear (see also equivocation).
However, it would be sheer pedantry to waste your life ruling out all
possible but highly unlikely interpretations, unless of course you are
drawing up a legal document.

amphiboly
See ambiguity.

analogy, arguments from
Arguments based on a comparison between two things which are
alleged to be similar. Arguments from analogy rely on the principle that
if two things are similar in some known respects they are likely to be
similar in other respects even if these are not directly observable. This
principle, which relies on induction, at best usually only yields
probable conclusions; it rarely provides a conclusive proof since
similarity in some respects does not always reliably indicate similarity
in other respects. An exception to this is when the similarity in question
is similarity of logical form, in which case, if one argument is valid
(see validity), then any other argument of the same logical form must
also be valid.

Arguing on the basis of analogy may at first glance seem an
entirely reliable form of reasoning. How else could we learn from our
experience if not by transferring the results of particular discoveries to
similar new situations? However, arguments from analogy are only
reliable if the situations being compared are relevantly similar, and
unfortunately there is no simple test for relevant similarity.

One of the most famous uses of argument from analogy is the
attempt to prove God’s existence known as the Argument from Design.
In its simplest form this is the argument that because there are various
visible similarities between natural objects and those which have been
designed by human beings — between the human eye and a camera, for
instance — we can conclude that both must have been produced by a
similar sort of intelligence. In other words, perceivable similarities
between two sorts of thing are taken as a reliable indication that they
have similar sorts of origin: in this case an intelligent designer. Because
the eye is more sophisticated in ‘design’ than the camera, using this
argument from analogy, we can conclude that the designer of the eye
was correspondingly more intelligent and powerful than the designer of
the camera. The conclusion of the Argument from Design is that the
intelligent and powerful designer of the eye must have been God.

However, as many philosophers have pointed out, the analogy
between such things as an eye and a camera is relatively weak;
although there are respects in which they are quite similar (both have
a lens, for instance), there are also numerous respects in which they
differ (the eye, for instance, is part of a living organism; the camera is
a machine). If the Argument from Design rests on a relatively weak
analogy (see disanology), then its conclusions about the causes of the
apparent design of natural objects must be correspondingly weak.
Besides, in this case there is also a highly plausible alternative
explanation of precisely the same observations, namely Charles
Darwin’s theory of evolution by natural selection. The Argument from
Design does not on its own provide anything like a proof of God’s
existence both because the analogy on which it rests is relatively weak
and because there is a competing theory which explains the apparent
design of living organisms as arising from the impersonal workings of
heredity and environment.

The philosopher Judith Jarvis Thomson, writing on the morality
of abortion, used an analogy to defend her view that even if a foetus has
rights, these do not necessarily override a woman’s right to determine
what happens in and to her body (see also thought experiment). She
compared some kinds of pregnancy with the imagined situation of
waking up to find that you have had a famous violinist plugged into
your vital organs and being told that unless you leave him plugged in
for nine months, thereby causing you considerable discomfort, he will
die. The point of this far-fetched analogy was to bring out in a clear way
some of what is at stake in debates about a foetus’s right not to be
aborted. Whilst we would admire someone who chose to keep the
violinist plugged in, it does not seem accurate to say that any right he
has to life overrides your right to determine what happens to your body.
Obviously this is a controversial analogy which is only relevantly
similar to some forms of pregnancy (and for most of us, the power of
the thought experiment depends on knowing which famous violinist is
to be plugged into us). However, Thomson’s use of this analogy was
very important in bringing out what was implicit in the pro- and anti-
abortion arguments and has been the starting-point for most discussion
of the topic since she published it in an article in 1971.

When animal rights activists argue that we should be more
concerned about animal welfare their arguments usually rely on an
implicit analogy between human and animal abilities to feel pain. We
know that humans feel pain and that, in its extreme forms, it is a terrible
thing which we would do almost anything to avoid: that’s why torture
can be so effective. Mammals are very like human beings in many
ways. They are genetically quite closely related to us and have similar
physiological responses to physical damage; like us they try to avoid
damage to themselves, and in certain circumstances make noises which
we think we can recognise as indicating that they are in pain because
they are similar to noises we make when in pain. So it seems reasonable
to conclude on the basis of the analogy between human beings and
mammals that mammals are capable of feeling certain sorts of pain.
True, there are some differences between humans and other mammals.
Apart from a few exceptional chimpanzees, other mammals don’t have
language, for instance. But these are not usually considered relevant
differences. Insects, however, are far less like most human beings than
are mammals; so any conclusion about insect pain based on an analogy
with human pain would be correspondingly weaker than one about
mammal pain.

Consider one more example. Some pundits have argued that
outlawing possession of guns in the United States would, far from
reducing violent crime, actually increase the number of shootings that
would occur. Their reasoning is based on the fact that outlawing alcohol
during the Prohibition was correlated with a huge increase in illegal
alcohol-related crime (but see correlation = cause confusion).
Similarly, they say, outlawing gun ownership will lead to an increase
in gun-trafficking, giving criminals even greater access to firearms than
they now have. And the more access criminals have to firearms, the
more likely they are to use them. This argument relies on there being
relevant similarities between the outlawing of alcohol during
Prohibition and the outlawing of guns today. It involves other
assumptions too, such as that if criminals possess firearms they are
likely to use them, and that widespread possession of firearms doesn’t
itself act as a deterrent to their use because of the risk of getting shot
yourself if you open fire (i.e. your opponent is more likely to be armed).
But the main argument rests on an analogy. However, it is fairly easy
to see that this is a very weak analogy since the situations differ in so
many important respects: the fact that guns don’t get consumed when
you use them, whereas alcohol does, for instance. If the two situations
can be shown to be significantly dissimilar then any conclusions drawn
on the basis of such an analogy will require independent support. The
conclusion of the argument could turn out to be true (see bad reasons
fallacy), but this argument from analogy alone does not provide
conclusive support for the conclusion.

Analogies are often used as a form of rhetoric. When, for
example, Hitler claimed that he was going to wring Britain’s neck like
a chicken, this was meant to show the power of Nazi Germany, and the
vulnerability of Britain: Germany’s relation to Britain was supposed to
be like that of a farmer to a chicken about to be slaughtered. Churchill
famously retorted, ‘Some chicken, some neck’, suggesting that the
analogy was weaker in certain relevant respects than Hitler believed,
and that Hitler’s conclusion about the ease with which he would defeat
the British and their Allies was unwarranted. Neither Hitler nor
Churchill produced an argument for their conclusions.

With strong analogies, the arguer may be on safe ground.
However, even where an analogy appears to be very strong, there is still
a possibility of being misled. Mushrooms and toadstools can look very
similar and are closely related, yet the former are edible and the latter
poisonous. So even where there seem to be excellent grounds for
drawing conclusions on the basis of two things being very similar in
some respect, it may prove unwise to treat these conclusions as firmly
established. This is not to say that arguing on the basis of an analogy
should be avoided, only that it should be treated with caution and that,
wherever possible, independent support for the conclusion should be
sought. It would be unreasonable to expect an analogy to hold in every
respect, or even in most respects; however, for the argument to have
any force, the analogy must hold in relevant respects. What counts as
a relevant respect is determined largely by context. As with most
applications of critical thinking it is important to be sensitive to the
particular case, a fact rarely acknowledged in textbooks on the subject.

anecdotal evidence
Evidence which comes from selected stories either of what has
happened to you or to someone you know. In many cases this is very
weak evidence and typically involves generalising from a particular
case (see rash generalisation).

For instance, if you are debating whether or not acupuncture is
an adequate alternative to conventional medicine, someone might tell
you that their friend tried acupuncture and that it seemed to work
wonders. On its own this is merely anecdotal evidence. First, there is a
risk that details of the story may get changed in the retelling. More
importantly, to argue from this single case that acupuncture is an
adequate alternative to conventional medicine would be irresponsible:
anecdotal evidence is different from a controlled scientific investigation
into the effectiveness of acupuncture. For instance, a scientist
investigating this question would want to have a control group to see if
people spontaneously recover from ailments without having any
treatment at all. A scientist would also consider more than a single case,
and follow up the history of individual cases to see if any improvements
in health were short-term. And, of course, comparisons would have to
be made between the effects of acupuncture and more conventional
medical techniques, taking into account placebo effects and the
possibility of spontaneous recovery. Anecdotal evidence
cannot usually provide this sort of information in a reliable form and
may be clouded by wishful thinking.

The term ‘anecdotal evidence’ is often used to suggest that
the evidence is merely anecdotal, that is, in a pejorative way. However,
not all anecdotal evidence is unreliable: if you have reason to be
confident in the source of the evidence, then anecdotal evidence
can help to support or undermine a conclusion. Indeed, many sorts
of scientific enquiry begin by examining anecdotal evidence about
the phenomenon to be examined, and on the basis of this develop a
way of testing in a controlled way whether or not this evidence
points to the truth of the matter. For instance, an investigation into
possible cures for night cramps in elderly patients might begin by
looking at the anecdotal evidence that quinine in tonic water reduces
their occurrence. Detailed examination of patients under controlled
conditions might then reveal that the anecdotal evidence had been
unreliable, and that the quinine had only a minimal effect on the
incidence of cramps.

The appropriateness of using anecdotal evidence depends
entirely on the context and on the type of anecdotal evidence
available.

antecedent
The first part of an ‘if . . . then’ statement (see conditional statement).
For example, in ‘If you spend too long at the computer screen then
you’ll get eye strain’, the antecedent is ‘you spend too long at the
computer screen’.

See affirming the antecedent, affirming the consequent,
consequent, denying the antecedent, denying the consequent.

appeals to authority
See truth by authority.

arbitrary redefinition
See humptydumptying and stipulative definition.

argument
Reasons supporting a conclusion. This should not be confused with the
use of ‘argument’, meaning a quarrel, in which assertion and counter-
assertion are far more common than reasoning. In the sense in which
‘argument’ is used in this book, an argument provides reasons for
believing a conclusion. In contrast, an assertion merely presents a
conclusion and we have no particular grounds for believing that
conclusion, unless of course we know its source to be a reliable
authority on the subject of the conclusion (see truth by authority).
Reliable authorities are usually capable of giving arguments which
support their conclusions.

In logic textbooks, arguments, especially deductive ones (see
deduction), are very neat, with the premises clearly distinguished from
the conclusion and the conclusion indicated by the word ‘therefore’. In
real life the structure of arguments is unlikely to be so easy to identify.
Usually at least one of the premises is assumed rather than stated
explicitly (see assumptions and enthymeme); conclusions do not
always come after the premises, they often come before, and are rarely
signposted by words such as ‘therefore’ and ‘so’. Consequently it is
often necessary to clarify the precise relation between premises and
conclusion before attempting to evaluate any argument.

For instance, you might come across the following:
  You shouldn’t let your child watch that film A Clockwork Orange.
  It’s so violent.
On further questioning it might emerge that the implied argument was:
  Watching violent films causes children to be violent.
  You should prevent children from doing anything that makes
  them violent.
  You can prevent your child watching a film.
  A Clockwork Orange is a violent film.
  Therefore you should prevent your child watching the film A
  Clockwork Orange.

This is a valid argument (see validity). Obviously it would in most
contexts be extremely tedious to spell out every condensed argument
in this fashion. However, often it is unclear precisely how the premises
are supposed to be supporting the conclusion; in such cases it may be
worth making the underlying argument explicit.

Notice that in the above argument, if the premises are true, then
the conclusion must be true: there is no possible situation in which all
the premises are true and yet the conclusion false. This is because the
structure of the argument is a valid one (see validity). Another way of
putting this is that the form of a valid argument is truth-preserving: if
you put true premises into this sort of structure, then you are guaranteed
to get a true conclusion from it. What’s more, if you know the argument
to be valid then you must either accept the conclusion as true, or else
deny the truth of at least one of the premises. A valid argument with
true premises is known as a sound argument.

Some arguments are inductive (see induction). For instance,
consider the following:

Picture restoration has often damaged important paintings; the
world’s national galleries all contain examples of damaging
restoration. So you should only embark upon a policy of picture
restoration with extreme caution since there is a serious
risk that otherwise you will cause more damage than you
prevent.

This is an argument, but it is not deductive: it is not truth-preserving.
Its conclusion, that you should only embark upon a policy of picture
restoration with extreme caution, is based on the evidence that some
picture restorers in the past have caused serious damage to paintings.
The reasons given for believing the conclusion are based on
observation and on the assumption that the future will be like the past
in certain relevant respects. Inductive arguments never prove anything
conclusively; however they do point to what is probably or almost
certainly true. They can provide very strong support for conclusions
even though this always stops short of the truth-preserving nature of
deductive arguments.

Arguments are of greater value than unsupported assertion since
they provide reasoning which other people can assess for themselves to
see whether or not it supports the given conclusion. Assessing the
arguments on either side is one of the best methods we have for
deciding between competing views on any issue. If someone presents
an argument we can judge whether or not their conclusion is supported
by the reasons given; if they resort to prejudice, rhetoric, and
unsupported assertion, even though the conclusions may turn out to be
true, we aren’t in a position to see why they are true or how they have
been reached.

assertion
An unsupported statement of belief. Whenever you simply say that
something is the case you make an assertion.

For instance, I might say, ‘Reading this book will improve your
critical thinking.’ This is an assertion because I have not given any
reasons or evidence to support this statement. Or, I might assert ‘God
does not exist’; but until I offer some kind of argument or evidence,
you would have no reason to believe me unless I had somehow
established myself as an authority on the subject (and even then you
might want to seek some kind of explanation of how I had come to this
view; see truth by authority).

Merely asserting something, no matter how loudly, doesn’t make
it true. Confident assertion is no substitute for argument, even though
most of us, in our uncritical moments, can be persuaded by people who
seem to know what they’re talking about, whether or not they really do.
The only way other people can assess the truth of an assertion is to
examine reasons and evidence that might be given in support of it, or
else to seek out evidence or reasons not to believe it. Nevertheless, bald
assertions of belief are common; this is in part because it would be
tedious to spell out every implicit reason for holding a belief,
particularly when communicating with someone who shares many of
your assumptions.

An unstated premise, one that is taken for granted and never made
explicit. Actually the word ‘assumption’ is ambiguous (see ambiguity)
since it could also mean a stated premise that is the starting-point of an
argument (see supposition, sometimes also known as a presupposition).
We all make assumptions most of the time; if we didn’t, any discussion
would require so much stage-setting that we’d never get to the
point. Because we share many assumptions it is relatively easy to
communicate with one another. But when two people try to discuss an
issue on which they hold very different assumptions, confusion and
misunderstandings are likely to arise.

For instance, in a discussion about the status of so-called
computer viruses, one eminent scientist argued that there are good
reasons for considering computer viruses a form of life since, like
ordinary viruses, they are capable of replicating themselves and are
parasitic. Another scientist pointed out that even if we concede the
point that computer viruses are very like ordinary viruses, this still
doesn’t prove that computer viruses should be considered living
organisms since it is contentious to say that ordinary viruses are alive
themselves. The first scientist was arguing on the basis of a strong
analogy (see analogy, arguments from) between computer viruses
and ordinary viruses and the second scientist was challenging the
conclusion which could be drawn even if the analogy actually held.
The second scientist’s point was that the first scientist was making a
large assumption about whether ordinary viruses are alive or not. Only
if ordinary viruses were alive would the first scientist’s conclusion be
warranted. This assumption was not made explicit in the first scientist’s
argument: he only gave good reasons for there being a strong analogy
between computer and ordinary viruses. Once the assumption has been
made explicit it can be discussed and its truth or falsity ascertained (see
also enthymeme). In this case the question of whether or not a virus is
a living thing could be addressed and then, if this is established, the
strength of the analogy between biological and computer viruses could
be examined.

Some people joke that when you assume something you ‘make
an ass out of “u” and “me” ’. This isn’t just a bad pun; it is misleading.
We all have to make assumptions most of the time and there is nothing
intrinsically wrong with making them provided that the assumptions
are actually true and we are aware of what those assumptions are. I
suppose the point of the comment is that in certain situations it is very
important not to make any assumptions before evidence has been
gathered. This is very different from saying that all assumptions should
be avoided, which would be an impossible goal (see also some/all
confusion).

authority
See kowtowing, truth by authority and universal expertise.