Plato, The Republic

Book VI
---
Well, the first thing to remember, I said, is that we have reached this point in
the course of an inquiry into the nature of justice and injustice. Fair enough,
what follows from that? Only this, if we do discover what sort of thing justice
is, are we then going to decide that the just man must be in no way different
from justice itself but in every way like justice? Or will we be content if he
comes as close to it as possible, and has a larger measure of it than anyone
else? We shall be content with that, he said. So, when we asked what sort of
thing justice was by itself and looked for the perfectly just man if he existed,
and asked what he would be like if he did exist, what we were looking for was a
model. The same with injustice and the unjust man. We wanted to look at the
perfectly just and unjust man, see how we thought they were placed in respect of
happiness and its opposite and be compelled to agree for ourselves as well, that
whoever came closest to those examples would have a share of happiness which
came closest to theirs. It wasn't our aim to demonstrate that these things were
possible. True enough. Suppose a painter paints a picture which is a model of
the outstandingly beautiful man, suppose he renders every detail of his painting
perfectly but is unable to show that it is possible for such a man to exist, do
you think that makes him any the worse a painter? Good heavens no. Then what
about us, aren't we in the same position? Can't we claim to have been
constructing a theoretical model of a good city? We certainly can. And is it
possible for anything to be put into practice exactly as it is described, or is
it natural for practice to have less hold on truth than theory has? I don't care
what some people may think, what about you? Do you agree or not? I agree, he
said. Then don't keep trying to compel me to demonstrate that the sort of
thing we have described in a theoretical way can also be fully realized in
practice. If we turn out to be capable of finding how a city can be run in a way
pretty close to what we have described, then you can say that we have discovered
how what you are asking for can be put into practice, or won't you be satisfied
with that? I know I would. So would I. In that case, what we have to do is try
to discover and point out what the failings are in cities nowadays, which stop
them being run in this way. And what is the minimum change which could help a
city arrive at political arrangements of this kind. Ideally, a single change,
failing that too, and failing that as few as possible in number and as small as
possible in impact. Absolutely, he said. All right then, there is one change
which I think would allow us to show that things could be different. It is not a
small change or an easy one, but it is possible. What is it? We've been using
the analogy of waves, well, now I'm coming to the largest wave, but I'll make my
suggestion anyway, even if it is literally the laughter of the waves, which is
going to engulf me in ridicule and humiliation. Listen carefully to what I'm
about to say. Tell me. There is no end to suffering Glaucon, for our cities and
none I suspect for the human race unless either philosophers become kings in our
cities, or the people who are now called kings and rulers become in the truest
and most complete sense of the word, philosophers. Unless there is this
amalgamation of political power and philosophy, with all those people whose
inclination is to pursue one or other exclusively, being forcibly prevented from
doing so. Otherwise, there is not the remotest chance of the political
arrangements we have described coming about to the extent that they can or
seeing the light of day. This is the claim which I was so hesitant about putting
forward, because I could see what an extremely startling claim it would be. It
is hard for people to see that this is the only route to happiness for a city in
its arrangements for the private or public life of its inhabitants.

My own personal view is that there is no reason to regard either or both of
these events as impossible, if they were impossible, we would quite rightly be a
laughing stock since our proposals would just be wishful thinking, isn't that
so? It is. Now will anyone challenge our contention that it is possible for the
sons of kings and rulers actually to be born with philosophical natures? No, he
said, no one in the world would challenge that. And if they are born with
philosophical natures, can anyone claim they are certain to be corrupted, even
we admit that it is difficult for them to survive, but is anyone going to
contend that in the whole of time out of all those who are born, not one is
ever going to survive? How could they? But it only needs there to be one.
Surely. With a city which is obedient to him, to bring about all the things
which are now regarded as impossible. Yes, one is enough, he said. After all, if
a ruler establishes the laws and way of life we have described, it is presumably
not impossible that the citizens will be prepared to follow them. Not in the
least impossible. Is it astonishing or impossible that the arrangements which
seem a good idea to us should seem a good idea to other people as well? Well, I
don't think so. That they are the best arrangements, assuming they are possible,
has been satisfactorily shown by our earlier discussion, I think. Yes, it has.
So the position we seem to have reached on lawgiving is this, our arrangements
are the best, if only they could be put into effect, and while it is difficult
for them to be put into effect, it is not impossible. Yes, he said, that is the
position we've reached. Well then, since that topic has struggled to a
conclusion, we'd better go on to deal with the ones which remain. These saviours
of our city, what will prepare them for their task? What course of study and way
of life? And when should each age group tackle each subject? Yes uh, we'd better
deal with that. You'll realize there probably won't be very many of them, the
elements of the nature we have described and which we say they must possess, are
seldom likely to be combined in the same individual, in most people this kind of
nature is fragmented. How do you mean? Well, you're aware that those who have a
love of learning, a good memory, intelligence, quickness of wit and everything
which follows from those qualities, and who at the same time are developing
energy and greatness of spirit, are unlikely to become the kind of people who
are naturally inclined to lead an orderly sober and steadfast life, quickness of
wit carries people all over the place and steadfastness goes out of the window.
True, he said. Steadfast characters by contrast, slow to change the sort of
people you can much more depend on, who in time of war are immovable in the face
of danger, are likewise steadfast and slow to change even when it comes to
learning. They are immovable and unteachable as if they'd been drugged. They are
full of sleep and yawns whenever they have to work hard at something of this
sort. Yes that's true. But we said our guardians must be liberally endowed with
both sets of qualities, otherwise they're not to be given the fullest education,
respect or power. Quite right too. In which case, don't you think the
philosophical character will be a rare one? Of course it will. It must be tested
in the hardships, fears and pleasures we were talking about a little earlier.

What's more, we can now add something we omitted then, which is that we must
exercise it in many branches of study, to see if it will be capable of enduring
the most demanding ones, or if it's an intellectual coward, the way some people
are physical cowards. Yes, he said, it's a good idea to find that out, but what
are these most demanding studies of yours? You may remember us distinguishing
three qualities of the soul with a view to drawing conclusions about justice:
self-discipline, courage and wisdom, and what each of these things was. If I
didn't remember that, I would deserve to miss the rest of this discussion. Can
you remember what came just before that? No, what? What we said, I believe, was
that we could either get the best possible view of them but only after a long
detour at the end of which they would be clearly revealed, or we could give an
explanation on a level with the discussion so far, you said that was good enough
and as a result, what was said then fell short of complete accuracy in my
opinion, though whether it was good enough for your purposes is for you to say.
As far as I'm concerned, he said, you gave us good measure and the same goes for
the others I think. In matters like these my friend, a measure which in any way
at all fall short of what really is, is no measure at all. What is incomplete
can never be the measure of anything, though for some people, there are times
when they are satisfied with that, and feel they don't have to look any further.
Yes, there are plenty of people who feel like that, it's laziness. Well, I said,
it's not a feeling we want a guardian of our city and laws to have. Fair enough.
In which case my friend, our guardian must go round by the longer road, he must
work as hard at studying as he does at physical training. Otherwise as we've
just been saying, he will never see the most important and appropriate subject
of study through to the end. I thought we dealt with the most important subject,
is there some subject even more important than justice and the things we've been
describing? Yes, I said, there is something more important. Also with these
virtues themselves, we shouldn't be looking at a mere outline of them the way we
are now, what we want is their realisation in every detail, we must not neglect
that, isn't it absurd to make every effort and do everything we can, to reach
the greatest possible precision and clarity over things of little significance,
and then decide that the most important things deserve less than total
precision? Utterly absurd, but this thing you call most important and its
subject matter, whatever you say that is, do you imagine any one will let you go
without asking you what it is? Of course I don't, why don't you ask me? You've
heard the answer often enough before, and now you've either forgotten it or else
this is another plan to make my life difficult by not letting me get away with
anything. It must be the second reason, I think. You've often heard me say, that
the most important branch of study is the form or character of the good, that
which just thing and anything else must make use of if they are to be useful and
beneficial, you must know that's what I'm going to say now, and you must also
know that it's not something we can have adequate knowledge of. But if we don't
know it, then however much we know about everything else, without that as you
are well aware, it'll be no more good to us than to possess something without
the good. Do you think it's any use to us to own all there is and yet not own
anything good? Or to be wise in everything but the good but have no wisdom about
what is beautiful and good? Good heavens no, I certainly don't. Another thing
you're well aware of is that while most people think the good is pleasure, those
with more sophistication think it is knowledge. Of course. And further my
friend, that those who hold this view are unable to show what knowledge it is,
they are compelled in the end to say that it is knowledge of the good. A pretty
absurd definition, he said. How can it fail to be absurd, they criticize us for
not knowing what the good is and then immediately assume we do know what it is.
They say the good is knowledge of the good, as if we're bound to understand what
they're talking about, as soon as they so much as utter the word good.
Absolutely true. What about those who define the good as pleasure? Are they any
less wider the mark than the others? Aren't they in their turn compelled to
admit that there are bad pleasures? Very much. So hence, I imagine, they find
themselves admitting that the same things are good and bad, don't they? Of
course. Is it clear then, that it is a subject on which there are many serious
disagreements? Yes, it is. And isn't something else clear, with justice or
beauty, lots of people might settle for the appearance of them, even if things
aren't really just or beautiful, they might choose to do, possess or think them
anyway. When it comes to things which are good on the other hand, no one has
ever yet been satisfied with the appearance, they want things that really are
good, they all treat the appearance of it with contempt. Yes, that's very clear
too, he said. This is what every soul follows. All its actions are
directed at this, it has a sort of divine intuition that the good is something,
but it is in doubt unable to get a firm grasp on what it is, or find any firm
belief of the kind it has about other things. As a result, it loses whatever
benefit it might have got from those other things, are we to accept that even
those best people in the city to whom we are planning to entrust everything must
remain in the dark, about something of this nature and importance? Certainly
not. But if it's not known, I said, in what way just and beautiful things are
good, and if in particular, a guardian does not know this, what kind of guardian
will justice and beauty have got for themselves then? One who is not much of an
asset to them in my opinion, and I have an intuition that no one will have a
satisfactory knowledge of justice and beauty without knowing this first. A sound
enough intuition. Well then, will we get the best arrangements for our society
if the guardian supervising it, is the kind of person who does know these
things. We're bound to. In that case, let me remind you about things which were
said earlier in the discussion and which have been said on many occasions in the
past, what things might they be. We say there are many beautiful things and many
good things and the same with everything else, that is how we classify them in
speaking of them. Yes, we do say that. We also say there is a beautiful itself
and a good itself, and the same with all the things, we then said, were many.
Applying the procedure in reverse, we relate them to a single form or character
of each, since we believe it is single, and call it what each is. That is so.
The many things we say can be seen but not thought, whereas the forms or
characters of things can be thought but not seen. Exactly. Very well. Which of
our faculties do we use to see the things we see? Our sight, he said. And our
hearing for the things we hear, and our other senses for everything we perceive?
Of course. Have you ever noticed, I asked, how much more extravagantly the
creator of the senses has made the power of seeing and being seen than the other
senses? No I haven't. Look at it this way, for hearing to hear and sound to be
heard, do they need some other class of thing as well, without this third thing,
will hearing fail to hear and sound fail to be heard. No they don't need any
other class of thing, he said. I suspect that many other faculties, I won't say
all of them, have no need for any further thing of this sort. Can you think of
any? No I can't. How about the faculty of sight, and the thing which is seen.
Has it ever struck you that those do need something of this sort? How do you
mean? If there is sight in the eyes and its possessor is trying to make use of
it, you surely realize that even in the presence of colour, sight will see
nothing and the colours will remain unseen unless one further thing joins them,
a third sort of thing which exists for precisely this purpose. What thing do you
mean? The thing you call light. True, he said. In that case, because it involves
a third thing of this important character, the link between the faculty of sight
and the ability to be seen is something more valuable than the links between the
other faculties and their objects, unless of course, light has no value. Well,
it certainly does have a value. Which of the heavenly gods then, do you take to
be the agent responsible for this? Who's is the light which best enables our
faculty of sight to see, and the things which are seen to be seen? The one you
or anyone else would take to be responsible, he said, the one you're asking
about is obviously, the sun. Now, do you agree with me about the natural
relationship of sight to this god? What are you saying about it? Sight is not
the sun, neither sight itself nor the place in which it occurs and which we call
the eye. No, it isn't. But of all the organs of perception I would say, the eye
is the most sunlike. Much the most. So the power which it has the ability to see
it receives from the sun as a kind of grant from an overflowing treasury?
Exactly. So too, the sun is not sight, but it is the cause of sight and it can
be seen by sight. That is so, he said. This is what you must take me to mean by
the child of the good, which the good produces as its own analog. In the world
of thought, the good stands in just the same relation to thinking, and the
things which can be thought as the sun in the world of sight, stands to seeing
and the things which can be seen. What do you mean, he said, please explain that
a bit further? You know that when the eyes stop being directed at objects whose
colours are in daylight and turn to those whose colours are lit by the lights of
the night, they are dimmed, and become virtually blind, as if there were no
clear sight in them? They certainly do. Whereas when they are directed at things
whose colours have the light of the sun shining on them, they see distinctly.
The same eyes now manifestly do have sight in them. Of course. You can look at
the soul in the same way, when it focuses where truth and that which is shine
forth, then it understands and knows what it sees, and does appear to possess
intelligence. But when it focuses on what is mingled with darkness, on what
comes into being and is destroyed, then it resorts to opinion and is dimmed as
if its opinions swing first one way and then another. Now by contrast, it
resembles something with no understanding. None at all. You can say that this
thing which gives the things which are known their truth and from which the
knower draws his ability to know, is the form or character of the good. Because
it is the cause of knowledge and truth, think of it by all means as something
known, but you will be right to regard it as different from and still more
beautiful than knowledge and truth, beautiful though both of these are. Just as
in our example, it is correct to think of light and vision as sunlike, but
incorrect to think that they are the sun. In the same way, here it is correct to
think of knowledge and truth good like, but incorrect to think that either of
them is the good. The good is something to be prized even more highly.

It's an incredible beauty you're talking about, he said, if it is the cause of
knowledge and truth but itself surpasses them in beauty, and you of all people
presumably, are not going to say that it is pleasure? Be silent, I said, don't
even mention the word, no, take a closer look at our comparison. How do you want
me to look at it? The sun gives to what is seen, I think you would say, not only
its ability to be seen, but also birth, growth and sustenance, though it is not
itself birth or generation. Of course it isn't. For the things which are known,
say not only that their being known comes from the good but also that they get
their existence and their being from it as well. Though the good is not being,
but something far surpassing being in rank and power. Yee~ gods! Glaucon
exclaimed, making us all laugh, what a miraculous transcendence! Don't blame me,
I said, you were the one who compelled me to tell you what I thought about the
subject. I was, and whatever you do, don't stop now. If nothing else at least
go through your comparison with the sun, to make sure you haven't left anything
out. I've left all sorts of things out, I said. Well, don't, don't omit even the
smallest detail. I'm sure I shall omit something, quite a lot probably, all the
same as far as it's possible on an occasion like this, I won't leave anything
out on purpose. No, don't, he said. Very well. You must be aware, as we said,
that there are these two things, one of them is ruler of the category and realm
of what can be understood, the other is ruler of what can be seen, of the
heavenly scene I could say, only I don't want you to think I'm playing with
words. Anyway, be that as it may, you accept that there are these two forms of
things: the seen and the understood? Yes I do. Imagine taking a line, which has
been divided into two unequal sections, and dividing each section, the one
representing the category of the seen, and the one representing the category of
the understood. Again, in the same proportion, the clearness or obscurity of the
sections of the line relative to one another, you will find to be as follows. In
the category of the seen, the first section is images, by which I mean in the
first place shadows and in the second place reflections in water or any dense
smooth shiny surface, everything of that sort if you see what I mean. Yes, I do.
The second section you must regard as what the first section is an image of, the
animals we see every day, the entire plant world, and the whole class of human
artefacts. Very well, I so regard it. Now, looking at our division in terms of
truth and its opposite, would you be prepared to say that the distinction
between the likeness and the thing it is a likeness of, is equivalent to the
distinction between the object of opinion, and the object of knowledge. Yes, I
would, he said, most emphatically. Ask yourself next how the section which
represents the understood should be divided? How should it be? Like this, in the
first part, the soul treats as images, the things which in the other section of
the line were originals, it is compelled to work from assumptions, proceeding to
an end point rather than back to an origin or first principle. In the second
part, by contrast, it goes from an assumption to an origin or first principle,
which is free from assumptions, it does not use the images which the first part
uses, but makes its way in the investigation using forms alone, through
themselves alone. I don't entirely follow what you just said. Let's try again.
You'll find it easier when you've heard what I have to say by way of
introduction. You're aware, I imagine, that when people are doing things like
geometry and arithmetic, there are some things they take for granted in their
respective disciplines, odd and even, figures and the three types of angle, that
sort of thing. Taking these as known, they make them into assumptions, they see
no need to justify them either to themselves or to anyone else, they regard them
as plain to anyone. Starting from these they then go through the rest of their
argument, and finally reach, by agreed steps, that which they set out to
investigate. Yes, I'm aware of that, he said. And you will also be aware that
they summon up the assistance of visible forms, and refer their discussion to
them, although they're not thinking about these, but about the things these are
images of. So, their reasoning has in view the square itself, and the diagonal
itself, not the diagonal they have drawn, and the same with other examples. The
models they construct or figures they draw, which have their own shadows and
images in water, these they treat in their turn as images in their attempt to
see the corresponding things themselves, which can be seen only by thought.
True. That is why I described this category as grasped by the understanding, but
as requiring for its investigation, that the soul make use of assumptions. The
soul cannot make any progress towards a first principle since it is unable to
escape from these assumptions, and move in an upwards direction. Instead, it
treats as images the things which were treated as originals and copied, by what
was in the section below them and which are thought of as clear, by comparison
with those images and valued for their clarity. I see, he said. You mean the
realm of geometry and its related disciplines. Finally, by the other section of
the line representing the objects of understanding, you must take me to mean
what reason itself grasps by its power to conduct a rational discussion, when it
uses assumptions not as first principles but as true bases, points to take off
from entry points, until it gets to what is free from assumptions and arrives at
the origin or first principle of everything. This it sees his hold of, then
turns round and follows the things which follow from this first principle, and
so makes its way down to an end point. It makes no use at all of any object of
the senses but only of pure forms, working through them and towards them, and it
ends in forms. I sort of see, he said, though not as well as I'd like. I think
what you're talking about is an enormous task, but I do at least understand that
you want to take that which is and is understood, and distinguish that part of
it which is studied by the knowledge which comes from rational discussion, as
something clearer than the part which is studied by what are called the
sciences, these use assumptions as first principles, and although those who
study them are compelled to use things thinking, rather than their senses to do
so. Still, because their investigation does not make its way upwards to a first
principle but proceeds from assumptions, you do not regard them as having an
intelligent understanding of their subjects. Although with a first principle,
they could be understood. I also think that when people are doing subjects like
geometry, you call their state of mind thought rather than understanding,
because you regard thought as a halfway house between opinion and understanding.
You've grasped my meaning well enough, I said. And please understand, that there
are four conditions arising in the soul, corresponding to the four sections of
the line. Understanding corresponds to the highest section, thought to the
second, belief to the third, and conjecture to the last. Classify them
accordingly, believing that the degree of clarity they possess is proportional
to the truth possessed by their objects. I understand, I agree, and I classify
them in the way you suggest.
